One-on-One Time – Babies
One-on-One Time - Children
One-on-One Time - Teens
Keeping it Positive
Positive instructions
Praise
Structure Up
Household Rules
When Children Misbehave - Part 1 Redirect
When Children Misbehave - Part 2 Consequences
Shared Book Reading
When Children Misbehave - Part 3 Ignore
When Children Misbehave - Part 4 Problem Solving
Online Child Safety
Crying
Emotional Support
Crisis Support
GoodBad Touch
Family Harmony
Family Budgeting
Keep Calm and Manage Stress including Take a Pause
Short Pause
Loving Kindness
Magical Number
When we are angry
Anger Management
Exercise
Online Safety
Talking about COVID-19
Children with Disabilities
Child Development - Introduction
Child Development - Babies & toddlers (0 - 2 years)
Child Development - Children (2 - 9 years)
Child Development - Teenagers (10 - 17 years)
Helping your children learn




One-on-One Time – Babies 
(c.1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! How are you doing? We are so happy that you have signed up to receive these messages. Today’s tip is about spending One-on-One Time with our babies. 


This builds a healthy attachment that will make them feel secure and loved.
 
It is normal to struggle to think of what to do with our babies.
 
Here are 7 easy tips to make it a success:


Step 1. Do it every day!


Try to spend time playing with your baby every day, at a time when you are not distracted by others, your television or phone. 


Step 2. Be close to your child. 


Skin-to-skin contact is especially important for new-borns and infants. For older toddlers, make sure you are at the same level as they are.


Step 3. Let your baby take the lead


Give them time to explore things in their own way and pace. Be patient and reassuring - the world is brand new to your child!


Step 4. Observe your child. 


See what your child is interested in or looking at. Notice their sounds, words and facial expressions, and try copying them!


Step 5. Play with your baby


Babies learn through play! Help your child explore the world through their five senses. It is okay for your child’s attention to wander to many different things. Just keep your attention on your child.


Step 6. Talk to your baby


Start talking to your baby from the moment they are born. Did you know your baby can even recognise their name at a very early age? Try saying your baby's name and notice how they respond! 


Use words to describe everything around you: your child’s actions, colours, shapes, numbers, sizes, textures, temperatures, tastes, sounds. 
Step 7. You can have quality time with your baby anytime! 


Connect with your baby playfully during feeding, bathing, and dressing, or calmly at bedtime.


Congratulations! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. Quality time with your children is the best gift that you can ever give them. 


One-on-One Time - Children
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! How are you doing? Today’s tip is about spending One-on-One Time with our children. 


It’s free and fun. It makes children feel loved and secure, and also increases their confidence and self-esteem!


Here are 6 tips to make it a success:


Step 1. Spend at least 5 minutes with each child


Even 5 minutes a day of quality time makes a big difference. It can be at the same time each day so your children look forward to it.


Step 2. Give your child your full attention


Make sure you will not be interrupted. Switch off the TV and put your phone on silent. It will show your child, they are important.


Step 3. Let your child choose the activity


Ask your child what they would like to do. You can say, "I have 5 minutes to spend One-on-One Time with you, what would you like to do?”


Choosing builds their self-confidence. If they want to do something that isn’t OK with COVID-19 rules, then this is a chance to talk with them about this. If your child cannot think of anything, you can give them a choice of a couple things that you know they like.


Step 4. Follow your child's lead


Children need to do things in their own time. Try to give them time to explore and be patient. Play alongside and copy what they are doing but try to let them keep the initiative.


Step 5. Use words to describe what your child is doing


Listening to your child is more important than talking to them at this time. If you do talk you should describe what your child is doing. Use words to describe actions, colours, shapes, numbers, sizes, textures, temperatures, tastes, sounds, and anything else that is happening!


Step 6. Have fun!


One-on-One Time with your child can be fun for you, too! You might even find that you feel less stressed after playing with your child.


Congratulations! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. Quality time with your children is the best gift that you can ever give them. 


One-on-One Time - Teens
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! How are you doing? Today’s tip is about spending One-on-One Time with our teens. 


When we have difficult relationships with our teenagers,  we spend a lot of time disciplining or complaining about them.


One-on-One Time helps build a positive, trusting relationship. When you really show interest in them, you make them feel valued and appreciated.


Here are 6 tips to make One-on-One Time a positive experience for you and your teen:


Step 1. Do it every day


Set aside a time each day when you and our teen will not be interrupted and when your teen does not have something else they want to do. Switch off television and phones so you will not be interrupted.


Step 2. Let your teen choose the activity


Tell your teen that you would like to spend some time with them and that they can choose what to do or talk about. Your teen might think this is weird at first, but will come to enjoy having this dedicated time with you!


Step 3. Follow your teen's lead


Remember this is your teen's activity. Accept their suggestions, show interest, and say something nice.


Step 4. Give your teen all of your attention. 


Look at your teen. Nodding or saying “I see” shows you are really paying attention. Accept what they are saying without judging them.


Step 5. Show your teen you are really listening


To make them feel supported, you can even try rephrasing what they said: “Yeah, I see that you find that difficult/fun/confusing/exciting.” 


Step 6. Have fun!


One-on-One Time with your teen can be fun for you, too! It might even make you feel less stressed.


Congratulations! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. Quality time with your children is the best gift that you can ever give them. 
Keeping it Positive
(c. 45 seconds)
Hello! Managing our children's behaviour can be challenging…even in the best of times. We sometimes do not notice when our children are behaving well. But when they are misbehaving, it can be a nightmare!


Today's Tip is all about Child Behaviour. There are 2 main ways that we can help our children behave positively more often.


First, we can find ways to encourage our children to behave well more often. Spending One-on-One Time with them is an important first step! 


Second, we can learn effective ways to manage difficult behaviours in a loving but firm way.


These suggestions are from over 50 years of research on what works. But don't take our word for it, try them out and decide for yourself. And remember...practice makes perfect!


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolkit.


Positive instructions
(c. 1 minute 15 seconds)
It‘s hard to feel positive when our kids or teenagers are driving us crazy. We often end up saying “Stop doing that!” But children are much more likely to do what we ask if we give them positive instructions and lots of praise for what they do right.


Here are 4 steps to help you get your children to follow your instructions more often:


Step 1. Get Your Child's Attention


Look at your child and say their name when you give your child an instruction. Get down to their level.


Step 2. Be Specific, Positive, and Realistic!


Describe exactly what you want your child to do. Say, 'Please wash your hands for 20 seconds before coming to dinner, instead of 'Wash your hands.'


Use positive words when telling your child what to do. Say, ‘Please put your clothes away in the cupboard,’ instead of ‘Don’t make a mess’.


Can your child actually do what you are asking them? It is very hard for a child to keep quiet inside for a whole day but maybe they can keep quiet for 15 minutes.


Step 3. Give Instructions One at a Time


Children are much more likely to do what you ask if you break things up into smaller steps.


Step 4. Praise Your Children When They Follow Instructions


They will feel good about it and be more likely to follow instructions in the future!


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolkit. In summary…


1. Get their attention
2. Be positive, specific, and realistic
3. One instruction at a time
4. Praise them for doing it! 


It will make a HUGE DIFFERENCE if you can learn these 4 simple steps!


Praise
(c. 1 minute)
Hi! I just wanted to thank you for making this commitment to improve the life of your children. It shows you really care!


Today's Parenting Tip is all about Praise. How did the above message make you feel?


We all appreciate it when the good things we do are recognised by others, especially when it is someone who is close to us. 


Praise works for our children, too. When you bring more attention to positive behaviour, they are likely to do it more often. They also will feel good about themselves! 


Here are 3 simple steps to get it right:


Step 1. Praise your child or teenager for something they have done well. They may not show it, but you’ll see them doing that good thing again. It will also reassure them that you notice and care.


Step 2. Praise the behaviour. Use words to describe the behaviour that you are praising. Say, 'Well done for finishing all your chores, Sam,' instead of 'Good job.'


Step 3. Praise with enthusiasm. Really mean it when you say it!


Well done for adding another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! Try to find 3 things that you can praise your children for every day. You can also praise other adults in your household, too. Notice how they respond!


Structure Up
(c. 1 minute)
Hello! COVID-19 has interrupted our daily work, home and school routines. This is hard for children, teenagers and for you. Making new routines can help.


Today's Parenting Tip is about how we can create daily routines with our children.


Daily routines, such as time for schoolwork, play, meals, and sleep, can help our children feel safe and secure. They also give our children a sense of security that they need to grow and develop.


Help your younger children learn routines by taking them through the activity step by step. Give one instruction at a time. Praise them each time they follow! 


Transition warnings can also be very helpful. They give your child some time to prepare for the next activity: "In 5 minutes it will be time to pack up the toys before dinner..."


Regular eating and sleeping times are especially important for babies. Not enough sleep can make your child cranky, irritable, and short tempered.


Here are some tips for how to help your child prepare for bedtime:


1. Try to have regular bedtimes each day as much as possible.
2. Try to make it quiet and the lights in the room dim. 
3. Spend some time with your child. You can sing a lullaby or tell a calm story.
4. Give your child a hug and kiss goodnight before leaving the room.  


Involve your teen in creating daily plans. Set goals and rewards together. They can plan when they do schoolwork and when they relax! 


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Here are some suggestions for routines that you could establish with your children:


Bedtime
Schoolwork
Chores
Mealtime
Play/free time
T.V. or gadget time
Storytime
One-on-One Time


You can add more, too!


Household Rules 
(c. 1 minute)
Hello! Today's Parenting Tip is about how we can involve our children in creating consistent household rules.


Household rules can help children feel secure and keep them safe from potential dangers both inside the house and in the community. They also help children to know what kind of behaviour is expected from them. 


Here are 6 simple tips on how you can make household rules with your children and teens: 


1. Involve your child in establishing household rules.
2. Make your household rules clear and specific.
3. Make sure your child understands the reasons why you are establishing a household rule.
4. Make your household rules fair and realistic (just like instructions).
5. Praise and simple incentives can help support your child in following a household rule.
6. Add only 1 household rule at a time.


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolkit. Remember when you involve your children in establishing household rules, they are more likely to follow them. Try to be consistent and positive.


When Children Misbehave - Part 1 Redirect
(c. 55 seconds)
Hello! All children misbehave sometimes. It is normal when they are tired, scared, hungry, or learning independence. Today's tips are all about what to do when our children misbehave…


Stop it before it starts! When your children get restless, you can distract them with something interesting or fun: "Come, let's play a game together!"


Keep it positive. It’s normal to want to say something about your child's negative behaviour, like “Don’t whine,” or “Stop running in the house.” Instead, just say something that you want your child to do, like "Speak with a calm voice," or "Remember to walk inside the house."


If your baby is starting to crawl or walk, you can also redirect them by physically picking them up and focusing their attention on something else interesting. Use a lively and cheerful voice!


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolkit. Remember that redirecting your children only works before or at the beginning of a bad behaviour. You can also always type "Help" for more tips. Have a great day!
When Children Misbehave - Part 2 Consequences 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! Today we are going to learn what we can do when our children are already misbehaving or have  misbehaved…


Instead of hitting or shouting, there are other ways to discipline your children like using consequences…and they work well!


Here are 5 tips for how to use consequences effectively:


1. Give your child a choice to follow your instruction before giving them the consequence.


2. Try to stay calm but firm when giving the consequence.


If you start yelling, it will just make things worse. Take a deep breath before responding.


3. Be realistic and follow through


Make sure you can follow through with the consequence. For example, take away a teenager’s phone for one hour instead of a week.


4. Reconnect afterwards 


Once the consequence is over, give your child a chance to do something good, and praise them for it.


5. Consequences for breaking rules


Consequences can also be used when your children forget a household rule.


For example: “Either you do your schoolwork before dinner, or you cannot watch your favourite T.V. show tonight.”.


In summary, consequences should be...


1. Realistic: Consider the age of your child
2. Immediate: Give them as soon as possible
3. Fair: Make sure the consequence is not too harsh
4. Consistent: Make sure you can follow through if you have to
5. The last resort: Try to encourage positive behaviour to happen more often!


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! Using consequences can help teach children self-discipline, independence, decision-making, and responsibility. They help children learn that their actions will have an impact on themselves and others. It is an important step to prepare them for their life outside of the family as they get older.


Shared Book Reading 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! Your child can learn a lot by looking at simple pictures in books, magazines, or newspapers together with you!


Here are some tips to guide you:


1. Follow your child’s interest
When your child shows interest in a picture (pointing, patting, looking), talk about what has attracted your child’s interest.


2. Use a lively voice
This will help to keep the child’s attention on the book.


3. Point, name and repeat
Pointing to and naming an object or person in the book will help your child learn new words. Children learn through repetition, so look for other opportunities to use that word. 




4. Be positive and supportive
Always respond positively to what your child says:  If your child points to a red apple and says “Tomato”, you can say “Yes, you’re right, it’s red - it's an apple!”


5. Making actions and links
Connect things in the book with things your child knows. If someone in the book is waving, you and your child can do the same. 


6. Talking about feelings
Use what is happening in the book to help your child understand emotion words (happy, sad, angry, scared). Use your face and voice. Talk about your child’s own feelings, and why other people might feel a certain way:


“Look, she is smiling. Why do you think she is smiling? What made you smile today?”


7. Babies and Books!
Even very young babies enjoy book-sharing and it helps their development and learning.  It’s okay for them to put the book in their mouth - they are exploring!


Well done! You have added another tool to your Parenting Toolbox! Sharing books will help your child to learn to speak, think, and focus better. It will also help them to understand feelings, which will make them get along with others better.


When Children Misbehave - Part 3 Ignore 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! Most parents struggle when their children have temper tantrums and other demanding behaviours. 


Here are 6 steps, you can try to make it happen less often!


1. Try to redirect your child's attention


When they start demanding or whining, first try to redirect them to a positive behaviour or activity and praise them! 


2. Make sure it is a behaviour you can ignore


Ignore negative attention seeking and demanding behaviours, like whining, demanding, showing off, and tantrums. If we respond or give in to these behaviours, children learn that this will get them attention and what they want. 


3. Ignore the behaviour not your child.


Ignoring means removing physical and verbal attention. Take a Pause, stay calm, and be aware of what your child is doing.


4. Praise your child immediately for the next positive behaviour


Having a tantrum is difficult for your child too. As soon as your child has calmed down, involve themin a positive activity. You can talk about what happened later, but right now your child needs love.


5. Be consistent when ignoring


Your child’s response might get worse when you first start using ignore. They are trying to test you! Continue to ignore the behaviour!


Over time, your child will learn that it no longer works.


6. Make sure you are giving your child plenty of positive attention at other times


If you find yourself ignoring your child's behaviour a lot, you are not being consistent (sometimes ignoring and sometimes giving in) OR you are not spending enough positive time with your child. One-on-One Time is super important!


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. 


Ignoring negative attention seeking and demanding behaviours is not easy. But if you are patient, it really works. You can do this!


When Children Misbehave - Part 4 Problem Solving 
(c. 1 minute)
Hello! Today's tip is about how we can help our children learn how to solve problems and conflicts.


Challenges are stressful. But problem-solving can really help. There are 6 basic steps for problem solving:


Here are 6 basic steps of problem solving with your teen:


1. Identify the problem
2. Think of possible solutions. 
3. Figure out what the results of each solution would be.
4. Choose one solution 
5. Try it out!
6. Did it work? Great! If it did not work, then try another solution.


We can also teach our children the same steps.


When something bad happens, we often get upset and blame our children. But what they really need is someone to help them work through their problems. 


Take a Pause! Become aware of anger and stress. Take a deep breath or count to 10 before you react. Then respond in a calmer way.


Try to find solutions together:


1. Allow your teen to express how they feel and accept their feelings. 
2. Try to listen to your teen and see things from their perspective. 
3. Thank your teen for being open and trusting you


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. Helping your teen learn how to solve problems will be something they will take with them the rest of their lives. What a gift!


Online Child Safety 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hello! Our children spend a lot of time online. Here are 6 tips to help you keep your children safe online:


1. Learn about risks and dangers. These include...


• Adults targeting children for sexual purposes on social media, gaming, and messaging platforms.
• Harmful content – like violence, hating women, hating foreigners, encouraging suicide and self-harm, misinformation, pornography.
• Teens sharing personal information and sexual photos or videos of themselves.
• Cyberbullying from peers and strangers.


2. Do these quick tech fixes to protect your children online:


• Turn on SafeSearch on your browser to filter adult content.
• Set up parental controls.
• Set up strict privacy settings on online apps and games.
• Cover webcams when not in use.


3. Create healthy and safe online habits:


• Create family tech agreements with your child about healthy device use.
• Create device-free spaces and times in your house (eating, playing, schoolwork, and sleeping).
• Help your child learn how to keep personal information private, especially from strangers!
• Remind your children that what goes online stays online (messages, photos, and videos).
• Actively supervise children’s time online, including computers, smartphones, and tablets.


4. Spend time with your child or teen online


• Get to know how your child experiences the digital world.
• Explore websites, social media, games, and apps together.
• Talk to your teen on how to report things that aren't OK.


5. Build open communication and trusting relationships


Tell your children that they can always talk to you if they experience something online (or anywhere) that makes them feel upset, uncomfortable, or scared.


6. Report and seek help


INHOPE Hotlines, IWF portals and the Child Helpline in your country offer support if you or your children experience online violence or other things that are not acceptable.


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! You have taken a BIG STEP to keeping your child safe online. Good for you!


Crying 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
The sound of a baby crying can be very distressing. It might make you think you are not a good parent. But all babies cry. It is one of the main ways a baby can tell you that something is wrong.


Here are some tips that might help when your baby cries:


1. Why do babies cry?


Crying is part of your baby's development. Crying usually increases when your baby is  2-3 weeks old,  is generally highest when your baby is around 6 to 8 weeks, and often reduces around 3 to 4 months. Every baby is different!


2. Respond as soon as you can


Go to your baby when you hear them crying. Babies who are carried and cuddled frequently, during both fussy and contented periods, may actually cry less.


3.  Check to see why your baby is crying


It might be hunger, pain, too much going on, rough handling, feeling cold/hot, wanting contact or attention, or feeling irritable. Babies can cry when they sense tension in the room, or sometimes for no reason at all! 


4. Comfort your baby


Try swaddling, gently rocking, or singing softly. You might need to feed your baby, change their diaper, make them feel warmer or cooler or just hold them


5. Take a break!


Take a Pause and try to relax. If you are getting angry because your baby won’t stop crying, you can leave them on their back in a safe place for a bit. Check on your baby every 5-10 minutes. 


If you feel overwhelmed, ask someone for help - that is a sign of strength.


6. Be gentle and patient with yourself


You are not a bad parent if your baby continues to cry. You are doing your best!


7. If you think your baby is injured or sick, call or visit a clinic


If your baby cries non-stop for a long time, seek medical help immediately. 


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. We are all learning here!


Emotional Support 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Hi! Today's Tip is about how we can help our children learn how to cope with their emotions:


1. Be open to your child


Your child will look to you for support and reassurance. Listen to your children when they share, accept how they feel, and give them comfort.


2. Share your own feelings


This will help your children recognise, understand and manage their own feelings too. 


3. Help your child learn how to talk about feelings


There are 6 basic emotions: Happy, Sad, Angry, Disgusted, Surprised, and Afraid. Even babies can feel and express these emotions. As children get older, they learn to identify many other emotions, like excited, frustrated, proud, lonely, peaceful, guilty, or confused.


4. Talking about difficult emotions


It is difficult for many people to talk about and express emotions and feelings. Especially for boys and men who were told not to cry when sad or laugh when happy. .


But we all have feelings and emotions. We can learn how to become aware of them, experience them in our body, and communicate about them. This can help children manage anger, disappointment, and frustration. 


5. Notice the positive emotions


Talking about feelings can also help your child be more aware of positive emotions (such as a sense of peace, happiness, or calmness), and appreciate a beautiful moment or feeling of love!


6. Show your child that you care


Use physical and verbal support to make your child feel accepted and loved. A hug or saying, "I understand," can mean a lot. Remind your child that you are there for them and that they can always talk to you. 


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! Remember that all emotions are okay. It's how we respond to them that is important!




Crisis Support 
(c. 1 minute)
Hi! Every child has challenging behaviour sometimes. If you would like some tips, type 'Help'.
Today's Tip is about how we can support our teens when they experience really difficult situations. 


When our children share difficult experiences with us, we may initially get angry because we are afraid for them. But that is when we need to stay calm, listen, and be open.


Here are some things you can do when your teen shares something difficult with you:


1. Take a deep breath before you respond. 
2. Listen to what your child is saying. Notice how they are feeling.
3. Notice how you feel. Ask yourself, "What does my child need right now?" 
4. Reassure your child that you are there for them. 
5. You can deal with the consequences later but right now your child needs you.
6. Discuss possible solutions or next steps to take action. 
7. Remind your child again that you love them and thank them for sharing with you. 


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! We understand that this can be really difficult. Supporting your child through a crisis will also teach them how to support others in difficult times. Good for you!


GoodBad Touch
(c. 1 minute)
Today's Tip is about how we can help to protect our children.


The idea of talking to children about abuse can be scary. We don't know what to say. But there are some simple things that can help them understand when it is not OK to be touched, and that they can tell you if something ever happens. 


Here are 3 things that you should make sure your child knows to protect them from abuse:


1. Learn about private parts 


The parts of their body that go under people's underwear or a swimsuit are private parts. It is not OK for other people to touch or to ask to look at them, or ask them to look at or touch theirs.


2. Your body belongs to you


If someone tries to touch your children's private parts they must say NO and tell a grown up that they trust. 


3. Bad secrets should be told. 


Your children should tell you if there is a secret that makes them feel worried. You will not be angry. Only nice secrets - like a surprise birthday party - should be kept secret. 


We understand that this can be really difficult. Please type "Help" if you want any extra support or guidance.


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! Supporting your child through a crisis will also teach them how to support others in difficult times. Good for you!




Family Harmony 
(c. 1 minute 40 seconds)
Today's tip is about how we can support positive family relationships at home.


Here are 6 simple steps for more family harmony at home:


1. Be a model of behaviour for your children
How we talk and behave in front of our children is a big influence on how they behave too! The more we practice modeling peaceful, loving relationships for our children, the more secure and loved they will feel.




2. Use positive language. It works!
Tell others what you want them to do instead of what you don’t want them to do: Instead of “Stop shouting,” try “Please speak more quietly”
Praise others to make them feel appreciated. Saying “Thank you for clearing the dinner” can make a big difference.


3. Be a great listener
Listen to others when they are talking with you. Be open and show them that you hear what they are saying. It can help to summarise what you have heard before responding: “What I hear you saying is…”


4. Share the load
Looking after children and other family members is difficult, but it’s much easier when responsibilities are shared. Try to share household chores, childcare, and other tasks equally amongst family members


5. Take care of yourself
Create a schedule for time “on” and time “off” with other adults in your household. It is okay to ask for help when you are feeling tired or stressed.


When you see arguments building up, agree to take a break and go into another room or outside if you can.


6. Do nice things together as a family
Let each family member take turns choosing a whole family activity. Find ways to spend time alone with other adults in your home, too!


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit!  Every time you resolve conflicts in a peaceful way, you increase your child's brain development. Be proud of yourself when you do it!


Family Budgeting 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
Millions of families are struggling to make ends meet, which can make us feel anxious, stressed, and sad. When you make a family budget, you agree on how to spend and save money together. This can help you have enough at the end of the month (so you need to borrow less) and help children understand that we all need to make hard decisions. 


Here are 4 quick steps to make a budget and save money together as a family:


1. What do we spend on now?


• Get a piece of paper or cardboard and a pen.
• Draw pictures of all the things that you and your family spend money on each month.
• Write next to each picture how much each thing costs.
• Add up how much money you have to spend each month.


2. Talk about needs and wants


• Needs: Which things are important or must haves for your family to survive? (like food, soap to wash hands, needs for ill or disabled family members).
• Wants: Which things are nice to have but not essential?
Discuss with your children where you can spend less as a family.


3. Build your own budget


• Find some stones or small objects. This is your money for the month.
• As a family, decide what you will spend on what, and put the stones on your picture.
• If you can save even a tiny amount for the future or an emergency  – it can make a big difference over time.


4. Find out where you can get extra help


Your government or community groups may be giving money, or food parcels to families during COVID-19. 


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Learning ways to manage money as a family has reduced arguments and stress for millions of families. That's real success!


________________


Keep Calm and Manage Stress including Take a Pause         
(c. 1 minute 25 seconds)
Hello! This is a stressful time, especially for parents. When we are stressed or angry, we do not make the best decisions. Taking the time to care for ourselves will help us care for our children.


Today's tip is about how to keep calm and manage stress in our busy lives.


Taking a Pause is a simple relaxation activity that you can do whenever you are feeling stressed or worried. It can also be helpful when you find your child is irritating you or has done something wrong. 


Step 1. Close your eyes and take a deep breath. 


Step 2. Ask yourself, "What am I thinking?" Notice if your thoughts are positive or negative.
Notice how you are feeling emotionally. Notice if your emotions are pleasant or unpleasant. Remind yourself that whatever you feel, it is okay.
Notice how your body feels. Notice anything that hurts or is tense.


Step 3. Focus on your breath. Feel your breath as it goes in and out. You can put a hand on your stomach and feel it rise and fall with each breath. Do this for about 10 breaths.


Step 4. Expand your awareness to your whole body. Listen to the sounds in the room. 


Step 5. Take a moment to reflect on whether you feel any different. When you are ready, open your eyes.


Well done for Taking a Pause. You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! 


You can do this anytime you are feeling stressed. It gives you a chance to be calmer. Even a few deep breaths or connecting with the ground beneath you can make a difference. You can also Take a Pause with your Children!






Short Pause 
(c. 22 seconds)
Hi! How are you feeling right now? Have you only got 30 seconds? Let's take a quick pause together. It might be helpful.


Sit down, close your eyes and listen to your breath as it goes in and out. Notice how you feel. When you are ready, open your eyes again. Everything is okay. 


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit.


Loving Kindness
(c. 45 seconds)
Hello! How are you feeling? If you are feeling overwhelmed or stressed, here is a short activity that can help when you are feeling like needing some more support to get through the day.


Recognise what is happening for you in this moment. What are you thinking? Are your thoughts positive or negative. How do you feel? Do you feel pleasant or unpleasant? How does your body feel? Do you feel tense or relaxed? 


Sit comfortably and close your eyes. Connect to your heart in a kind and gentle way. You may want to place one hand on your heart or chest. You can then say the following words silently to yourself:


May I be peaceful.
May I be safe.
May I be healthy.
May I be happy.
May there be love in my family.
May I feel loved.
Before you open your eyes, take a moment to reflect on your experience. Notice if you feel any different.


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit.


Magical Number
(c. 35 seconds)
Hello! Did you know that 3 is a magical number? Breathe in to the count of three and breathe out to the count of three. How do you feel now? Do you feel any different?


What are your three favourite foods? Can you name three things you can see right now? Can you hear three sounds you can hear right now? What are three things you are grateful for right now? 


Breathe in to the count of three and breathe out to the count of three. How do you feel now? Do you feel any different? Three is a magical number!


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit.


When we are angry 
(c. 1 minute)
Hello! We love our children and teenagers, but stress from caregiving, money, and COVID-19 can make us angry. Here is how we can maintain control and keep calm.


Stop the river at the source. The same things usually make us get stressed and angry every time. What makes you angry? When does it happen? How do you normally react?


Prevent anger from starting in the first place. Get some sleep or rest when you are tired. Try to eat something when you are hungry. Ask someone for support when you are feeling alone.


Here are some things that can help make it less likely that bad things happen when you are angry: 


1. Cut back on drinking alcohol or don’t drink, especially when the kids are awake.
2. Do you have weapons or things  that can be used to hurt others?  Lock them up, hide them or take them out of the home.
3. It’s ok to have your children stay somewhere safe or take them to a place where they can get help.


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. Learning how to manage your anger can help you  avoid some difficult situations. 


Anger Management
(c. 17 seconds)
Hi! Managing anger can be really difficult. Take a break when you feel you are getting angry at your children or someone else.


Go somewhere else for 5 minutes to regain control of your emotions. If you have safe outdoor space, go outside. You can get through this!


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit.


Exercise 
(c. 55 seconds)
Hello! Here's a fun physical activity that can help release stress and keep healthy.


Stand up and stretch your arms up to the sky. Push away any clouds and let the sun shine down on you. Stretch to both sides. Stretch to the front and to the back.


Let your hand hang by your side. Squeeze your shoulders tightly up to your ears as you breathe in, scrunch your eyes, and hold your breath. Release your shoulders as you relax your body.


Relax your arms and let your arms swing sideways, and turn your upper body. Your arms should gently hit your back as you twist from side to side.


Place one foot in front of the other and make small circles from ankles, remember to turn to both sides. Do each foot with four circles in each direction.


Now shake your whole body as fast as you can. Shake it up high! Shake it down low! Shake it all around!


Close your eyes and raise your arms slowly above your head as you breathe in. Lower your arms slowly to your side as you breathe out.


Take a moment to reflect on your experience. 


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit. 
Physical exercise is a great way to reduce stress and keep healthy. You can do this activity at any time whenever you feel like you need to release stress and energise your mind and body.
________________
Online Safety 
(c. 1 minute 25 seconds)
We are now spending a lot more time online. Being connected helps reduce the impact of COVID-19 and encourages us to continue with our lives…but it also presents risks and dangers.


Here are 5 tips that can help you keep yourself safe online:


1. Learn about risks and dangers


• Adults targeting people for sexual purposes on social media, gaming, and messaging platforms.
• Harmful content – like violence, hating women, hating foreigners, encouraging suicide and self-harm, misinformation, pornography
• Sharing personal information and sexual photos or videos.
• Cyberbullying from other people and strangers.


2. Here are some quick tech fixes to reduce risks:


• Turn on SafeSearch on your browser to filter adult content.
• Set up parental controls.
• Set up strict privacy settings on online apps and games.
• Cover webcams when not in use.


3. Create healthy and safe online habits:


You can also create healthy and safe online habits like creating device-free spaces and times in your house (eating, playing, schoolwork, and sleeping).


4. Maintain privacy


Keep personal information private, especially from strangers. – some people are not who they say they are! Remember that what goes online stays online (messages, photos, and videos).


5. Report and seek help


Report to INHOPE Hotlines and IWF portals to get support if you experience online violence or other things that are not acceptable.


Well done! You have added another skill to your Parenting Toolkit! Digital parenting is just like parenting in the real world. You have taken a BIG STEP to keeping you and your children safe online. Good for you!
________________
Talking about COVID-19 
(c. 1 minute 20 seconds)
When your children ask you about COVID-19, be willing to talk. They will already have heard something. Silence and secrets do not protect our children. Honesty and openness do. Think about how much they will understand. You know them best.


Here are 4 simple steps that you can do when talking about COVID-19 with your children:


Step 1. Be open, honest, and supportive


Allow your child to talk freely. Ask them open questions and find out how much they already know.


Always answer their questions truthfully. Think about how old your child is and how much they can understand.


Your child may be scared or confused. Give them space to share how they are feeling and let them know you are there for them.


Step 2. It is OK not to know the answers.


It is fine to say “We don’t know, but we are working on it; or we don’t know, ‘but we think’.”  Use this as an opportunity to learn something new with your child. The WHO and UNICEF websites are great first steps to learn


Step 3. Be a hero not a bully


Explain that COVID-19 has nothing to do with the way someone looks, where they are from, or what language they speak.


Tell your child that we can be compassionate to people who are sick and those who are caring for them.


Step 4. End on a good note


Check to see if your child is okay. Remind them that you care and that they can talk to you anytime. Then do something fun together!


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! When you talk about COVID-19 with your child in a supportive way, you make them feel loved and safe. You are the hero of this story!
________________
Children with Disabilities 
(c. 1 minute 30 seconds)
All children, including those living with disabilities, need love, respect and time especially at difficult times.


Here are 6 simple tips that you can do to support children living with disabilities: 


1. Keep your child safe and well 


• Keep your country's COVID-19 rules, and help your child to be active - do whatever exercise you can with them inside or outside your home
• Keep emergency contact numbers somewhere easy to see


2. Try to understand how they are feeling


• Your child may be feeling stressed, anxious, and frustrated.
• Tell them you love them


3. Talk and communicate with your child


• Get down to your child’s level when you speak. 
• Look at them and smile
• Give them time to tell you or show you what they think
• Tell your child that you understand


4. Praise them!


• Praise them for behaving well, and for trying. 
• Focus on what they can do, not what they can't.
• Only help children when they need it. This helps to build independence!


5. Make a daily plan


• Having things that are the same each day helps children feel secure and safe.
• Include some things they like to do.
• Give your child choices: this gives them a sense of control and builds self-esteem.
• Use simple language and clear instructions. If words don’t work, try gestures and pictures. 


6. Ask for help 


• Share the load with other adult family members.
•  You are not alone! Keep connected with people who understand your situation. 
• Share your challenges AND your successes.
• It is normal to feel stressed, frustrated, and afraid at this time.
• Be kind to yourself and take a break when you need to!


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Children with disabilities need love, respect and time – just like any other child
Child Development - Introduction
(c. 30 seconds)


Sometimes we feel frustrated with our children because we expect them to behave in ways that they are not yet developmentally ready for. 


Learning about child development means we can have realistic expectations and spot any problems with their growth and development.


All children develop at different rates. But there are some things that we expect children to be able to do at an age. These are called ‘development’ milestones.


Many things affect our children's development. Development is helped by eating healthy food, having immunisations, and parents or caregivers who talk to children a lot. 


Child Development - Babies & toddlers (0 - 2 years)
(c. 1 minute)
Babies from 0 to 1 year need a strong bond with a parent or caregiver who provides food, sleep, cleaning, comfort and safety. They need lots of play and attention - the most active time of brain development is during the first 1000 days of life!
* From 0 to 6 months, babies smile, babble and cry to attract your attention. We should provide care, cuddling and protection.
* From 6 to 11 months, babies cling to you, especially when feeling insecure or frightened.
* From 12 months onwards, most babies start to walk, talk and explore things around them!
Toddlers from 1 to 2 years become curious little explorers - watch out for climbing! They learn through play and trying things out. They want to learn how to do new things (like getting dressed) and make their own decisions. Praise them frequently to encourage them!
Toddlers start learning new words and speaking in sentences. They do not like to lose, share or take turns, so use opportunities to start teaching them how to handle these situations calmly. They may express feelings in dramatic ways (like screaming on the floor!), but with your patient help, they can start to learn how to manage their feelings.
Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Knowing about child development can help you feel less frustrated by your children’s behaviour.
Child Development - Children (2 - 9 years)
(c. 1 minute)




Young children from 2 to 5 years still have many of the same needs as toddlers. They learn through actions and play, and start developing friendships with other children. Young children often find it difficult to separate make-believe from reality. They may talk a lot and ask many questions. We should be honest when we reply! Our child may ask again if they don't understand or want to know more.
Young children usually continue to express their feelings in dramatic ways, especially if they have to do something they don’t like! Keep teaching them patiently how to manage their emotions and responses if they lose, have to share, or need to take turns. 
Older children of 6 to 9 years get more interested in learning at school and spending time with other children – they can be very active! Children may answer back to adults to show that they “know”. It is important to build your child’s independence and trust them to do simple and safe tasks without your assistance.
At this age, children can be very self-conscious and sensitive, so recognise and speak with them about their emotions and about questions they may have around topics like religion. By now, they should be getting better at managing anger and frustration. 
Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Knowing about child development can help you feel less frustrated by your children’s behaviour.


Child Development - Teenagers (10 - 17 years)
(c. 1 minutes 30 seconds)


The teen years are the second most active time of brain development!


Young teenagers of 10 to 12 years continue to gain interest in learning at school and spending time with other teens. Their interest in religion or spirituality may grow. 


Young teenagers may answer back to you more frequently to show you they know “how”. They can feel very self-conscious and sensitive, so trust them to do more tasks independently to build their self-esteem. Continue to spend time with them, so you know what is going on in their lives and can help them manage difficult emotions like anger and frustration. 


Teenagers of 13 to 14 years can often feel insecure and confused. They need a lot of affection, reassurance, and encouragement to help them believe in their abilities. Their feelings get hurt easily, and they may have mood swings, act bossy, and be unhappy when they lose. 


Their friends are increasingly important - also in their decision-making. They often begin to challenge rules that adults set for them at home or school. Make sure to give them some freedom, but also provide reliable rules that don’t change. 


Teenagers of 15 to 17 years are able to communicate with you about almost anything – though they may prefer being with peers more than with you. They can have exciting new ideas and ideals, as they form their own identity. Encourage them to begin to take responsibility for the future. Be patient and accepting of the person they are becoming - even if it is not what you had imagined!


Teenagers have a growing sense of their sexuality, so they need guidance to make safe and healthy choices. They may show risk-taking behaviours, frequent mood swings, and rebellious attitudes. Monitor who their friends are and have clear rules to keep them safe. Keep supporting them, loving them, and guiding them so they feel comfortable and secure.


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Knowing about child development can help you feel less frustrated by your children’s behaviour.


Helping your children learn
(c. 1 minute 20 seconds)
COVID-19 has interrupted our children's education with school closures and remote learning. It is normal to feel overwhelmed when we have to help our children learn, especially when we also have stress about work and money. 


Here are 5 steps that you can do to help your children continue learning during this time: 


Step 1. Create a routine around learning and schoolwork


Make a daily plan with your child for when they can spend time doing educational activities. This can include structured schoolwork and other activities online, reading, writing, or arts. Allow flexibility and time for play and relaxation too.


Step 2. Make learning fun and playful 


Children learn best when learning is fun! Try to find ways to make learning playful to keep your child interested and engaged. 


Step 3. Remember that you are a parent NOT a substitute teacher! 


Your role is to support your child by creating a space to learn. You do not need to know all the answers. Help them explore their interests and ask questions. Go at your child's pace and be patient with yourself. 


Step 4. Stay connected with your child's school and teachers 


Find out how to stay in touch with your children’s teacher or school to stay informed, ask questions and get more guidance. If you are struggling or know someone who is struggling with school work or the home situation, please discuss this with a teacher that you feel close to. Parent groups or community groups can also be a good way to support each other with your home schooling.


Step 5. Support your child when they go back to school 


Tell your child that it is okay to feel scared or worried about going back to school. Allow your child to share how they are feeling. It is also normal if your child behaves differently to their usual behaviour. Discuss how going to school might be different and how they can protect themselves from COVID-19. Ask them how their day went and support them if they experienced any difficulties.


Well done for adding another tool to your Parenting Toolkit! Helping your child continue learning during this difficult time is so important. Your best efforts will make a difference!